Foundry Start-to-End Tutorial (#509)
PureStake/moonbeam-docs: tutorials/foundry-start-to-end.md

---
title: Using Foundry Start to End with Moonbeam
description: Learn what to consider when using the Foundry library to build a project on Moonbeam from start to end in this step-by-step tutorial.
---

# Using Foundry Start to End with Moonbeam

![Banner Image](/images/tutorials/foundry-start-to-end/foundry-banner.png)

_January 10th, 2022 | by Jeremy Boetticher_

## Introduction {: #introduction } 

> Foundry has become an increasingly popular developer environment to develop smart contracts with, since utilizing it only requires a single language: Solidity. Moonbeam offers [introductory documentation on using Foundry](/builders/build/eth-api/dev-env/foundry.md) with Moonbeam networks, which is recommended to read to get an introduction to using Foundry. In this tutorial we will be dipping our toes deeper into the library to get a more cohesive look at how to properly develop, test, and deploy.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Foundry has become an increasingly popular developer environment to develop smart contracts with, since utilizing it only requires a single language: Solidity. Moonbeam offers [introductory documentation on using Foundry](/builders/build/eth-api/dev-env/foundry) with Moonbeam networks, which is recommended to read to get an introduction to using Foundry. In this tutorial we will be dipping our toes deeper into the library to get a more cohesive look at how to properly develop, test, and deploy.  
```

```
ds-test/=lib/forge-std/lib/ds-test/src/
forge-std/=lib/forge-std/src/
openzeppelin-contracts/=lib/openzeppelin-contracts/
```

Finally, let's open up the `foundry.toml` file. In preparation for Etherscan verification and deployment, add this to the file:

```toml
[profile.default]
src = 'src'
out = 'out'
libs = ['lib']
solc_version = '0.8.17'

[rpc_endpoints]
moonbase = "https://rpc.api.moonbase.moonbeam.network"

[etherscan]
moonbase = { key = "${MOONSCAN_API_KEY}" }
```

The first addition is a specification of the `solc_version`, underneath `profile.default`. The `rpc_endpoints` tag allows you to define which RPC endpoints to use when deploying to a named network, in this case, Moonbase Alpha. The `etherscan` tag allows you to add Etherscan API keys for smart contract verification, which we will go over later.  

## Writing Smart Contracts {: #writing-smart-contracts-in-foundry }

> Smart contracts in Foundry that are meant to be deployed will by default belong in the `src` folder. In this tutorial, we'll write two smart contracts. Starting with the token:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart contracts in Foundry that are meant to be deployed by default belong in the `src` folder. In this tutorial, we'll write two smart contracts. Starting with the token:
```

    uint256 capacity;
    ContainerStatus public status;

    constructor(MyToken _token, uint256 _capacity) {
        token = _token;
        capacity = _capacity;
        status = ContainerStatus.Unsatisfied;
    }

    function updateStatus() public {
        address container = address(this);
        uint256 balance = token.balanceOf(container);
        if (balance < capacity) {
            status = ContainerStatus.Unsatisfied;
        } else if (balance == capacity) {
            status = ContainerStatus.Full;
        } else if (_isOverflowing(balance)) {
            status = ContainerStatus.Overflowing;
        }
    }

    function _isOverflowing(uint256 balance) internal view returns (bool) {
        return balance > capacity;
    }
}
```

The `Container` smart contract can have its status updated based on how many tokens it holds. It requires a `MyToken` smart contract instance to function, so when we deploy it, we will need logic to ensure that it is deployed with a `MyToken` smart contract.  

## Testing in Foundry {: #testing-in-foundry }

Before we deploy anything to a TestNet or MainNet, however, it's good to test your smart contracts. There are many types of tests:

> - Unit tests are tests that allow you to test specific parts of a smart contract's functionality. When writing your own smart contracts, it can be a good idea to break functionality into different sections so that it is easier to unit test

Reviewer: Perhaps we could bold or italicize the names of the tests? Check with @eshaben ...

> - Unit tests are tests that allow you to test specific parts of a smart contract's functionality. When writing your own smart contracts, it can be a good idea to break functionality into different sections so that it is easier to unit test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Unit tests allow you to test specific parts of a smart contract's functionality. When writing your own smart contracts, it can be a good idea to break functionality into different sections so that it is easier to unit test
```

> - Fuzz tests are tests that allow you to test a smart contract with a wide variety of inputs to check for edge cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fuzz tests allow you to test a smart contract with a wide variety of inputs to check for edge cases
```

> - Integration tests are tests that allow you to test a smart contract when it works in conjunction with other smart contracts, so that you know it works as expected in a deployed environment. Often you can do this by forking an EVM, so that you can simulate a transaction on a MainNet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Integration tests allow you to test a smart contract when it works in conjunction with other smart contracts, so that you know it works as expected in a deployed environment. Often you can do this by forking an EVM, so that you can simulate a transaction on a MainNet
```

### Unit Tests in Foundry {: #unit-tests-in-foundry}

To get started with writing tests for this tutorial, make a new file in the `test` folder:  

```
cd test
touch MyToken.t.sol
```

> By convention, all of your test should end with `.t.sol` and start with the name of the smart contract that it is testing. In practice, the test can be stored anywhere, and is considered a test if it has a function that starts with the word *"test"*. Let's start by writing a test for the token smart contract. Open up `MyToken.t.sol` and add:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By convention, all of your tests should end with `.t.sol` and start with the name of the smart contract that it is testing. In practice, the test can be stored anywhere, and is considered a test if it has a function that starts with the word *"test"*. Let's start by writing a test for the token smart contract. Open up `MyToken.t.sol` and add:  
```

```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

import "forge-std/Test.sol";
import "../src/MyToken.sol";

contract MyTokenTest is Test {
    MyToken public token;

    function setUp() public {
        token = new MyToken(100);
    }

    function testConstructorMint() public {
        assertEq(token.balanceOf(address(this)), 100);
    }
}
```

> Let's break down what's happening here. The first line is typical for a Solidity file: setting the Solidity version. The next two lines are imports. `forge-std/Test.sol` is the standard library that forge (and thus Foundry) includes to help with testing. This includes the `Test` smart contract, certain assertations, and [forge cheatcodes](https://book.getfoundry.sh/forge/cheatcodes).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's break down what's happening here. The first line is typical for a Solidity file: setting the Solidity version. The next two lines are imports. `forge-std/Test.sol` is the standard library that forge (and thus Foundry) includes to help with testing. This includes the `Test` smart contract, certain assertions, and [forge cheatcodes](https://book.getfoundry.sh/forge/cheatcodes).  
```

> If you take a look at the `MyTokenTest` smart contract, you'll see two functions. The first is `setUp`, which is ran before each test. So in this test contract, a new instance of `MyToken` is deployed every time a test function is ran. You know if a function is a test function if it starts with the word *"test"*, so the second function, `testConstructorMint` is a test function.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you take a look at the `MyTokenTest` smart contract, you'll see two functions. The first is `setUp`, which is run before each test. So in this test contract, a new instance of `MyToken` is deployed every time a test function is run. You know if a function is a test function if it starts with the word *"test"*, so the second function, `testConstructorMint` is a test function.  
```

```solidity
contract ContainerHarness is Container {
    constructor(MyToken _token, uint256 _capacity) Container(_token, _capacity) {}

    function exposed_isOverflowing(uint256 balance) external view returns(bool) {
        return _isOverflowing(balance);
    }
}
```  

Now, inside of the `ContainerTest` smart contract, you can add a new test that tests the previously unreachable `_isOverflowing` contract:  

```solidity
    function testIsOverflowingFalse() public {
        ContainerHarness harness = new ContainerHarness(token , CAPACITY);
        assertFalse(harness.exposed_isOverflowing(CAPACITY - 1));
        assertFalse(harness.exposed_isOverflowing(CAPACITY));
        assertFalse(harness.exposed_isOverflowing(0));
    }
```

Now, when you run the test with `forge test`, you should see the following:  

**PUT THE CONSOLE IMAGE HERE**  

### Fuzzing Tests in Foundry {: #fuzzing-tests-in-foundry}

### Forking Tests in Foundry {: #forking-tests-in-foundry}

## Deploying in Foundry with Solidity Scripts {: #deploying-in-foundry-with-solidity-scripts }

> Not only are tests in Foundry written in Solidity, the scripts are too! Like other developer environments, scripts can be written to help interact with deployed smart contracts or can help along a complex deployment process that would be difficult to do manually. Even though scripts are written in Solidity, they are never deployed to a chain. Instead, much of the logic is actually ran off-chain, so don't worry about any additional gas costs for using Foundry instead of a JavaScript environment like HardHat.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not only are tests in Foundry written in Solidity, the scripts are too! Like other developer environments, scripts can be written to help interact with deployed smart contracts or can help along a complex deployment process that would be difficult to do manually. Even though scripts are written in Solidity, they are never deployed to a chain. Instead, much of the logic is actually run off-chain, so don't worry about any additional gas costs for using Foundry instead of a JavaScript environment like HardHat.  
```

In this tutorial, we will be using Foundry's scripts to deploy both the `MyToken` and `Container` smart contracts. To create the deployment scripts, create a new file in the `script` folder:  

```
cd script
touch Container.s.sol
```

By convention, scripts should end with `s.sol`, and have a name similar to the script that it relates to. In this case, we are deploying the `Container` smart contract, so we have named the script `Container.s.sol`, though it's not the end of the world if you use some other suitable or more descriptive name.  

In this script, add:  

```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

import "forge-std/Script.sol";
import {MyToken} from "../src/MyToken.sol";
import {Container} from "../src/Container.sol";

contract ContainerDeployScript is Script {
    function run() public {
        // Get the private key from the .env
        uint256 deployerPrivateKey = vm.envUint("PRIVATE_KEY");
        vm.startBroadcast(deployerPrivateKey);

        // Make a new token
        MyToken token = new MyToken(1000);

        // Make a new container
        new Container(token, 500);

        vm.stopBroadcast();
    }
}
```

> Let's break this script down. The first line is once again standard: declaring the solidity version. The imports include the two smart contracts you previously added, which will be deployed. This includes additional functionality to use in a Script, including the `Script` contract.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's break this script down. The first line is standard: declaring the solidity version. The imports include the two smart contracts you previously added, which will be deployed. This includes additional functionality to use in a Script, including the `Script` contract.  
```

> Now let's look at the logic in the contract. There is a single function, `run`, which is where the script logic is hosted. In this `run` function, the `vm` object is used often. This is where all of the Forge cheatcodes are stored, which determines the state of the virtual machine that the solidity is ran in.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's look at the logic in the contract. There is a single function, `run`, which is where the script logic is hosted. In this `run` function, the `vm` object is used often. This is where all of the Forge cheatcodes are stored, which determines the state of the virtual machine that the solidity is run in.  
```

In the first line within the `run` function, `vm.envUint` is used to get a private key from the system's environment variables (we will do this soon). In the second line, `vm.startBroadcast` starts a broadcast, which indicates that the following logic should take place on-chain. So when the `MyToken` and the `Container` contracts are instantiated with the `new` keyword, they are instantiated on-chain. The final line, `vm.stopBroadcast` ends the broadcast.  

Before we run this script, let's set up some of our environment variables. Create a new `.env` file:  

```
touch .env
```

And within this file, add the following:  

```
PRIVATE_KEY=YOUR_PRIVATE_KEY
MOONSCAN_API_KEY=YOUR_MOONSCAN_API_KEY
```

!!! note

>     Foundry provides [options for handling your private key](https://book.getfoundry.sh/reference/forge/forge-script#wallet-options---raw), other than providing it in the environment variables. It is up to you to decide whether or not you would rather use it in the console, have it stored in your device's environment, using a hardware wallet, or using a keystore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Foundry provides [additional options for handling your private key](https://book.getfoundry.sh/reference/forge/forge-script#wallet-options---raw). It is up to you to decide whether or not you would rather use it in the console, have it stored in your device's environment, using a hardware wallet, or using a keystore.
```

To add these environment variables, run the following command:  

```
source .env
```

Now your script and project should be ready for deployment! Use the following command to do so:  

```

> forge script script/Container.s.sol:ContainerDeployScript --broadcast --verify -vvvv --rpc-url moonbase

Author: I was able to do the whole thing with a fresh virtual box, so this might be a bug with Foundry? Did you try running after updating foundry with `foundryup`?

> forge script script/Container.s.sol:ContainerDeployScript --broadcast --verify -vvvv --rpc-url moonbase

Reviewer 2: awesome that worked! thank you!

[rpc_endpoints]
moonbase = "https://rpc.api.moonbase.moonbeam.network"

[etherscan]
moonbase = { key = "${MOONSCAN_API_KEY}" }
```

The first addition is a specification of the `solc_version`, underneath `profile.default`. The `rpc_endpoints` tag allows you to define which RPC endpoints to use when deploying to a named network, in this case, Moonbase Alpha. The `etherscan` tag allows you to add Etherscan API keys for smart contract verification, which we will go over later.  

## Writing Smart Contracts {: #writing-smart-contracts-in-foundry }

Smart contracts in Foundry that are meant to be deployed by default belong in the `src` folder. In this tutorial, we'll write two smart contracts. Starting with the token:

```
touch MyToken.sol
```

Open the file and add the following to it:

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

// Import OpenZeppelin Contract
import {ERC20} from "openzeppelin-contracts/contracts/token/ERC20/ERC20.sol";

// This ERC-20 contract mints the specified amount of tokens to the contract creator
contract MyToken is ERC20 {
  constructor(uint256 initialSupply) ERC20("MyToken", "MYTOK") {
    _mint(msg.sender, initialSupply);
  }

>   // An external minting function allows anyone to mint as many tokens as they want.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // An external minting function allows anyone to mint as many tokens as they want
```

  function mint(uint256 toMint, address to) external {
    require(toMint <= 1 ether);
    _mint(to, toMint);
  }
}
```

As you can see, the OpenZeppelin ERC20 smart contract is imported by the mapping defined in `remappings.txt`.  

The second smart contract will depend on this token contract:  

```
touch Container.sol
```

Open the file and add the following to it:

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

// Import OpenZeppelin Contract
import {MyToken} from "./MyToken.sol";

enum ContainerStatus {
    Unsatisfied,
    Full,
    Overflowing
}

> // This ERC-20 contract mints the specified amount of tokens to the contract creator

Author: ```suggestion
```

In this tutorial, you will be testing out how your container smart contract interacts with an already deployed `MyToken` contract on Moonbase Alpha.  

Let's add a new test function to the `ContainerTest` smart contract in `Container.t.sol` called `testAlternateTokenOnMoonbaseFork`:

```solidity
    function testAlternateTokenOnMoonbaseFork() public {
        // Creates and selects a fork
        uint256 moonbaseFork = vm.createFork("moonbase");
        vm.selectFork(moonbaseFork);
        assertEq(vm.activeFork(), moonbaseFork);

        // Get token that's already deployed & deploys a container instance
        token = MyToken(0x359436610E917e477D73d8946C2A2505765ACe90);
        container = new Container(token, CAPACITY);

        // Mint tokens to the container & update container status
        token.mint(CAPACITY, address(container));
        container.updateStatus();

>         // Assert that the capacity is full, just like the rest of the time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        // Assert that the capacity is full, just like the rest of the time
```

        assertEq(token.balanceOf(address(container)), CAPACITY);
        assertTrue(container.status() == ContainerStatus.Full);
    }
```

> The first step (and thus first line) in this function is to have the test function fork a network with `vm.createFork`. Recall that `vm` is a cheatcode provided by the Forge standard library. All that's necessary to create a fork is an RPC URL, or an alias for an RPC URL that's stored in the `foundry.toml` file. In this case, we added an RPC URL for "moonbase" in [the setup step](#setup-a-foundry-project), so in the test function we will just pass the word "moonbase". This cheatcode function returns an ID for the fork created, which is necessary for activating the fork.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first step (and thus first line) in this function is to have the test function fork a network with `vm.createFork`. Recall that `vm` is a cheatcode provided by the Forge standard library. All that's necessary to create a fork is an RPC URL, or an alias for an RPC URL that's stored in the `foundry.toml` file. In this case, we added an RPC URL for "moonbase" in [the setup step](#setup-a-foundry-project), so in the test function we will just pass the word `"moonbase"`. This cheatcode function returns an ID for the fork created, which is necessary for activating the fork.  
```

On the second line, after the fork has been created, the environment will select and use the fork in the test environment with `vm.selectFork`. The third line is just to demonstrate that the current fork, retrieved with `vm.activeFork`, is the same as the Moonbase Alpha fork.  

The fourth line of code retrieves an already deployed instance of `MyToken`, which is what's useful about forking: you can use contracts that are already deployed.  

> The rest of the code tests capacity like you would expect a local test to. If you run the tests (with the "-vvvv" tag for extra logging), you'll see that it passes:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The rest of the code tests capacity like you would expect a local test to. If you run the tests (with the `-vvvv` tag for extra logging), you'll see that it passes:  
```

In this tutorial, we will be using Foundry's scripts to deploy both the `MyToken` and `Container` smart contracts. To create the deployment scripts, create a new file in the `script` folder:  

```
cd script
touch Container.s.sol
```

By convention, scripts should end with `s.sol`, and have a name similar to the script that it relates to. In this case, we are deploying the `Container` smart contract, so we have named the script `Container.s.sol`, though it's not the end of the world if you use some other suitable or more descriptive name.  

In this script, add:  

```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

import "forge-std/Script.sol";
import {MyToken} from "../src/MyToken.sol";
import {Container} from "../src/Container.sol";

contract ContainerDeployScript is Script {
    function run() public {
        // Get the private key from the .env
        uint256 deployerPrivateKey = vm.envUint("PRIVATE_KEY");
        vm.startBroadcast(deployerPrivateKey);

        // Make a new token
        MyToken token = new MyToken(1000);

        // Make a new container
        new Container(token, 500);

        vm.stopBroadcast();
    }
}
```

> Let's break this script down. The first line is standard: declaring the solidity version. The imports include the two smart contracts you previously added, which will be deployed. This includes additional functionality to use in a Script, including the `Script` contract.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's break this script down. The first line is standard: declaring the solidity version. The imports include the two smart contracts you previously added, which will be deployed. This includes additional functionality to use in a script, including the `Script` contract.  
```

Before we run this script, let's set up some of our environment variables. Create a new `.env` file:  

```
touch .env
```

And within this file, add the following:  

```
PRIVATE_KEY=YOUR_PRIVATE_KEY
MOONSCAN_API_KEY=YOUR_MOONSCAN_API_KEY
```

!!! note
    Foundry provides [additional options for handling your private key](https://book.getfoundry.sh/reference/forge/forge-script#wallet-options---raw). It is up to you to decide whether or not you would rather use it in the console, have it stored in your device's environment, using a hardware wallet, or using a keystore.

To add these environment variables, run the following command:  

```
source .env
```

Now your script and project should be ready for deployment! Use the following command to do so:  

```
forge script Container.s.sol:ContainerDeployScript --broadcast --verify -vvvv --rpc-url moonbase
```

> What this command does is run the `ContainerDeployScript` contract as a script. The `--broadcast` option tells Forge to allow broadcasting of transactions, the `--verify` option tells Forge to verify to Moonscan when deploying, `-vvvv` makes the command output verbose, and `--rpc-url moonbase` sets the network to what *"moonbase"* was set to in `foundry.toml`.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What this command does is run the `ContainerDeployScript` contract as a script. The `--broadcast` option tells Forge to allow broadcasting of transactions, the `--verify` option tells Forge to verify to Moonscan when deploying, `-vvvv` makes the command output verbose, and `--rpc-url moonbase` sets the network to what `moonbase` was set to in `foundry.toml`.  
```

---
title: Using Foundry Start to End with Moonbeam
description: Learn what to consider when using the Foundry library to build a project on Moonbeam from start to end in this step-by-step tutorial.
---

# Using Foundry Start to End with Moonbeam

![Banner Image](/images/tutorials/foundry-start-to-end/foundry-banner.png)

_January 10th, 2022 | by Jeremy Boetticher_

## Introduction {: #introduction } 

> Foundry has become an increasingly popular developer environment to develop smart contracts with, since utilizing it only requires a single language: Solidity. Moonbeam offers [introductory documentation on using Foundry](/builders/build/eth-api/dev-env/foundry) with Moonbeam networks, which is recommended to read to get an introduction to using Foundry. In this tutorial we will be dipping our toes deeper into the library to get a more cohesive look at how to properly develop, test, and deploy.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Foundry has become an increasingly popular developer environment to develop smart contracts with, since utilizing it only requires a single language: Solidity. Moonbeam offers [introductory documentation on using Foundry](/builders/build/eth-api/dev-env/foundry){target=_blank} with Moonbeam networks, which is recommended to read to get an introduction to using Foundry. In this tutorial we will be dipping our toes deeper into the library to get a more cohesive look at how to properly develop, test, and deploy.  
```

In this demonstration, we will deploy two smart contracts. One is a token and another will depend on that token. We will also write unit tests to ensure that the contracts work as expected. To deploy them, we will write a script that Foundry will use to determine the deployment logic. Finally, we will verify the smart contracts on a Moonbeam network's blockchain explorer.  

## Checking Prerequisites {: #checking-prerequisites } 

To get started, you will need the following:

 - Have an account with funds. 
  --8<-- 'text/faucet/faucet-list-item.md'
 - 
--8<-- 'text/common/endpoint-examples.md'
 - Have [Foundry installed](https://book.getfoundry.sh/getting-started/installation){target=_blank}
 - Have a [Moonscan API Key](/builders/build/eth-api/verify-contracts/api-verification/#generating-a-moonscan-api-key){target=_blank}

## Setup a Foundry Project {: #setup-a-foundry-project }

The first step to start a Foundry project is of course to create it. If you have Foundry installed, you can run:

```
forge init foundry && cd foundry
```

> This will have the forge utility initialize a new folder named `foundry` with a Foundry project initialized within it. The `script`, `src`, and `test` folders may have files in them already. Be sure to delete them, because we will be writing our own soon.  

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I think it makes sense to put it in back ticks here because were referring to the `forge` command

        } else if (balance == capacity) {
            status = ContainerStatus.Full;
        } else if (_isOverflowing(balance)) {
            status = ContainerStatus.Overflowing;
        }
    }

    // Returns true if the contract should be in an overflowing state, false if otherwise
    function _isOverflowing(uint256 balance) internal view returns (bool) {
        return balance > capacity;
    }
}
```

The `Container` smart contract can have its status updated based on how many tokens it holds. It requires a `MyToken` smart contract instance to function, so when we deploy it, we will need logic to ensure that it is deployed with a `MyToken` smart contract.  

## Testing in Foundry {: #testing-in-foundry }

Before we deploy anything to a TestNet or MainNet, however, it's good to test your smart contracts. There are many types of tests:

- **Unit tests** — allow you to test specific parts of a smart contract's functionality. When writing your own smart contracts, it can be a good idea to break functionality into different sections so that it is easier to unit test
- **Fuzz tests** — allow you to test a smart contract with a wide variety of inputs to check for edge cases

> - **Integration tests** — allow you to test a smart contract when it works in conjunction with other smart contracts, so that you know it works as expected in a deployed environment. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Integration tests** — allow you to test a smart contract when it works in conjunction with other smart contracts, so that you know it works as expected in a deployed environment
```

contract ContainerTest is Test {
    MyToken public token;
    Container public container;

    uint256 constant CAPACITY = 100;

    // Runs before each test
    function setUp() public {
        token = new MyToken(1000);
        container = new Container(token, CAPACITY);
    }

    // Tests if the container is unsatisfied right after constructing
    function testInitialUnsatisfied() public {
        assertEq(token.balanceOf(address(container)), 0);
        assertTrue(container.status() == ContainerStatus.Unsatisfied);
    }

    // Tests if the container will be "full" once it reaches its capacity
    function testContainerFull() public {
        token.transfer(address(container), CAPACITY);
        container.updateStatus();

        assertEq(token.balanceOf(address(container)), CAPACITY);
        assertTrue(container.status() == ContainerStatus.Full);
    }
}
```

This test smart contract has two tests, so when running the tests, there will be two deployments of both `MyToken` and `Container`, for four smart contracts in total. When testing, you should see the following command:  

![Unit Testing in Foundry](/images/tutorials/foundry-start-to-end/foundry-1.png)

> ### Test Harnesses in Foundry {: #test-harnesses-in-foundry }

Author: It's more of a subset of a Unit test, but I can make it more clear that it is one

```
ds-test/=lib/forge-std/lib/ds-test/src/
forge-std/=lib/forge-std/src/
openzeppelin-contracts/=lib/openzeppelin-contracts/
```

Finally, let's open up the `foundry.toml` file. In preparation for Etherscan verification and deployment, add this to the file:

```toml
[profile.default]
src = 'src'
out = 'out'
libs = ['lib']
solc_version = '0.8.17'

[rpc_endpoints]
moonbase = "https://rpc.api.moonbase.moonbeam.network"
moonbeam = "https://rpc.api.moobeam.network"

[etherscan]
moonbase = { key = "${MOONSCAN_API_KEY}" }
moonbeam = { key = "${MOONSCAN_API_KEY}" }
```

The first addition is a specification of the `solc_version`, underneath `profile.default`. The `rpc_endpoints` tag allows you to define which RPC endpoints to use when deploying to a named network, in this case, Moonbase Alpha and Moonbeam. The `etherscan` tag allows you to add Etherscan API keys for smart contract verification, which we will go over later.  

> ## Adding Smart Contracts {: #adding-smart-contracts-in-foundry }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Add Smart Contracts {: #add-smart-contracts-in-foundry }
```

On the second line, after the fork has been created, the environment will select and use the fork in the test environment with `vm.selectFork`. The third line is just to demonstrate that the current fork, retrieved with `vm.activeFork`, is the same as the Moonbase Alpha fork.  

The fourth line of code retrieves an already deployed instance of `MyToken`, which is what's useful about forking: you can use contracts that are already deployed.  

The rest of the code tests capacity like you would expect a local test to. If you run the tests (with the `-vvvv` tag for extra logging), you'll see that it passes:  

```
forge test --vvvv
```

![Forking Tests in Foundry](/images/tutorials/foundry-start-to-end/foundry-4.png)

That's it for testing! You can see the complete [`Container.t.sol` file](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PureStake/moonbeam-docs/master/.snippets/code/tutorials/foundry-start-to-end/Container.t.sol){target=_blank} and [`MyToken.t.sol` file](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PureStake/moonbeam-docs/master/.snippets/code/tutorials/foundry-start-to-end/MyToken.t.sol){target=_blank} on GitHub.

> ## Deploying in Foundry with Solidity Scripts {: #deploying-in-foundry-with-solidity-scripts }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Deploy in Foundry with Solidity Scripts {: #deploy-in-foundry-with-solidity-scripts }
```

Reviewer 2: I'll update the "deploying" titles in my PR to "deploy"

Not only are tests in Foundry written in Solidity, the scripts are too! Like other developer environments, scripts can be written to help interact with deployed smart contracts or can help along a complex deployment process that would be difficult to do manually. Even though scripts are written in Solidity, they are never deployed to a chain. Instead, much of the logic is actually run off-chain, so don't worry about any additional gas costs for using Foundry instead of a JavaScript environment like HardHat.  

> In this tutorial, we will be using Foundry's scripts to deploy both the `MyToken` and `Container` smart contracts. To create the deployment scripts, create a new file in the `script` folder:  

Reviewer 2: maybe add a subtitle before this line for Moonbase Alpha

```
source .env
```

Now your script and project should be ready for deployment! Use the following command to do so:  

```
forge script Container.s.sol:ContainerDeployScript --broadcast --verify -vvvv --rpc-url moonbase
```

What this command does is run the `ContainerDeployScript` contract as a script. The `--broadcast` option tells Forge to allow broadcasting of transactions, the `--verify` option tells Forge to verify to Moonscan when deploying, `-vvvv` makes the command output verbose, and `--rpc-url moonbase` sets the network to what `moonbase` was set to in `foundry.toml`.  

You should see something like this as output:  

![Running a Script in Foundry](/images/tutorials/foundry-start-to-end/foundry-5.png)

You should be able to see that your contracts were deployed, and are verified on Moonscan! For example, this is where my [`Container.sol` contract was deployed](https://moonbase.moonscan.io/address/0xe8bf2e654d7c1c1ba8f55fed280ddd241e46ced9#code){target=_blank}.  

The entire deployment script is [available on GitHub](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PureStake/moonbeam-docs/master/.snippets/code/tutorials/foundry-start-to-end/Container.s.sol){target=_blank}.  

> ### Deploying on Moonbeam MainNet {: #deploying-on-moonbeam-mainnet }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Deploy on Moonbeam MainNet {: #deploy-on-moonbeam-mainnet }
```

> Let's say that you're comfortable with your smart contracts and you want to deploy on the Moonbeam MainNet! The process isn't too different from what was just done, you just have to change the command's rpc-url: 

Reviewer 2: I would also make a note that they'll need to update their configs from `"moonbase"` to `"moonbeam"`

Reviewer 2: even though it's obvious 😅

---

> title: Using Foundry Start to End with Moonbeam

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Using Foundry Start to End
```
